The facts were these.
Pushing Daisies was a genre slurpee that began
airing on October 3, 2007.
The show went on to air for a total of 1 year,
7 months, 4 days, 23 hours, 1 minute and 4
seconds.
It was created by Geek Moses and fashion divinity:
Bryan Fuller, notable for his other shows:
Dead Like Me, Wonderfalls, American Gods,
but most probably and most notibly Bryan Fuller
is known for Hannibal.
You see, adult Bryan, aged 17,933 days 6 hours
and 14 minutes, was quite obsessed with death
in his art.
He wanted to understand it, and his curiosities
were never indulged quite like Pushing Daisies
– which were not the same death curiosities
that Hannibal exercised—oh my god
This piece will not contain spoilers, because
I know a lot of people missed this show originally.
If I may, I’m merely gonna sell you on this
wonderful, odd, captivating, beautiful, clever,
quirky, and majestically strange show that
was doomed from day one.
Which sort of means the show was about itself.
Roll the – roll the credits now.
please.
It’s the red button under the green ya...
Pushing Daisies was a show on ABC that ran
from October 3rd, 2007 to June 13th, 2009
or two short seasons.
It’s first season was ordered by ABC to
a 13 episode run, before getting upped to
a full season order (22ish episodes).
But only 9 episodes were completed before,
never thought I’d say these words out loud
again: The Writer’s Strike.
Fuller made the most of it and quickly made
the 9th episode of season one the season finale.
So, that’s the way the show was screwed,
the first time.
It gets muddy from there.
But essentially ABC saw ever-declining ratings
as the second season kicked off, so the 13
written episodes would serve as the only additional
episodes – ABC choosing and announcing to
not even to air the last three of them, but
as the fandom got a little noisy about that,
ABC did eventually choose to air them … I
wrote this down, one sec … 10PM on Saturdays.
Screweth, the second and final.
It never got a single full season.
Just, chance.
The entire show idea came from one of Bryan’s
original ideas for an episode of Dead Like
Me where Grim Reaper George would have trouble
claiming souls because someone was going around
and touching them all back to life.
Fuller has also cited that the Jean Pierre
Jeunet film Amelie was
an inspiration which is not hard to see.
Amelie and Pushing Daisies very much have
the same starry-eyed and wondrous view of
the world.
And I like how it ended.
Abruptly.
Hastily, and not set up.
A shock.
Which is how people die in the world of Pushing
Daisies.
It happens without warning and then people
get a hasty minute to sum up their lives and
somehow solve their own demise.
I’m not saying this show couldn’t have
run for 10 glorious seasons, but I am saying
that it went out on its own terms, kinda literally.
I’m not saying this fact makes me happy,
but it is kinda fitting.
I’m not sure there’s a fair way to accurately
describe what Pushing Daisies in a single
sentence that is a) all-encompassing and b)
without a generous helping of semicolons.
So, bottoms up.
No spoilies, promise.
Just talking premise and construction (because
I want everyone to watch and experience this
stupendous thing).
Okay, here we go.
Pushing Daisies is an absurdly pristine, storybook
like universe in-which lives one Ned the piemaker,
a man with the ability to revive people with
the touch of a finger but at the expense of
someone or something nearby generally of the
same brain size—eg.
A revived frog can kill a bird, but not a
human—and he does this to Lonely Tourist
Charlotte Charles, a person he is madly in
love with, and she him, but Ned can never
touch someone or something he’s revived
with his skin ever again, lest it die post
haste, and this time permanently.
I did a bad job, that’s like maybe 10% of
what this show is—I mean, besides a semi-literal
explanation of a stupendously not literal
show.
Also, there’  s a lot of pie.
“And he became obsessed with pies.”
The entire show is narrated wonderfully by
Jim Dale.
It is often described as a “forensic fairy
tale,” which I love but also have no idea
where that phrase was originally coined.
No bother, it’s description is apt.
Pushing Daisies is also a crime procedural
that comments on other crime procedurals,
often involving murder, and often as a means
to get ahead in the world of business.
Like, there’s so many layers going on with
this show and I want nothing more than to
pull a wonderful pie metaphor out but pies
really don’t have that many layers.
Okay, so Pushing Daisies is a lot like a Taco
Bell 7-layer burrito .. of story.
I think it’s a testament to this show that
it defies description so aptly, not because
it’s necessarily that hard to start talking
about it, it’s more the fear that you might
never be able to stop.
It’s just a big, big thing with twists and
turns in the meta-story while telling more
personal stories in the episode to episode
continuity – looking and sounding like a
fairy tale but telling complex relationship
stories in the throws – just pulling one
of the air – the launch of a car that runs
off dandelions while trying to solve a murder
of someone who claims to have been killed
by a crash test dummy – confused?
That’s just one episode.
It’s like that.
Every single episode.
And I’m still only scratching the surface
to say all that and not talk about the way
the show handles love.
Which is 100% like a fairy tale.
People fall in love, irreparably forever,
at first sight.
This happens in every episode—hell it’s
what the show is about.
Two people are gobsmackingly in love and can
never touch skin to skin, forever.
They learn how to navigate an apartment without
the piemaker ending the life of his one true
love Lonely Tourist Charlotte Charles.
We genuinely watch along as these people try
to figure out a hell of a relationship set
back.
And I think that’s a beautiful segue into
why this show is so beloved by so many people.
Take everything I’ve just said, and it might
serviceably describe the first three episodes
of the show.
Once it is a little more comfortable in the
fairy tale framing device, it starts exploring
the world and motivations of these characters
at a level that few shows ever do.
It takes purposeful caricatures, like a pair
of retired synchronized swimmers and cheese
enthusiasts and says, what makes you human?
It has immense depth for such a screwball
high-level conceptual murder procedural experimental
art comedy.
Hey, there we go.
Nailed the one-sentence descriptor.
[clapping] thank you, thank you.
High five in the whole office.
This show would not be what it is without
the incredible cast.
Chi McBride—or as I like to think of him,
Cyrus from The Frighteners—does incredible
work as private investigator Emerson Cod.
Lee Pace, even given his stellar track record
of amazing roles in his career, turns in a
performance that is super easy to empathize
with.
And Anna Friel, known for being in the 2009
Will Ferrell Saturday morning tv show reboot
Land of the Lost, needs to be cast in more
awesome things so get on it, Hollywood.
And the Darling Mermaid Darlings Lily and
Vivian played to perfection by Swoosie Kurtz
and Ellen Green, deliver a huge scoop of humanity
to characters that could have easily been
caricatures.
Plus a guest star list that includes huge
talent in vastly different roles than they’re
usually cast in.
Hello, Molly Shannon.
These characters are brilliantly written and
brought to life by Fuller, Lisa Joy, Peter
Ocko, Gretchen J. Berg, Aaron Harberts, Abby
Gewanter, Chad Gomez Creasey, Kath Lingenfelter,
Scott Nimerfro, Dara Resnik, Jim Danger Gray,
Rina Mimoun, Davey Holmes, and Doug Petrie.
The writing does so much lifting on this show.
If you wanna be a writer this is a good show
to study.
Or the music by Jim Dooley always helping
to always be helping to set an audience’s
emotional state for the trip down Fairy Tale
lane (not to be confused with Mockingbird
Lane, Fuller’s one episode reboot of The
Munsters, BUT DID YOU KNOW Jim Dooley also
scored that).
The wonderful cinematography by Michael Weaver.
The absolutely unreal set decoration by Halina
Siwolop, art directed by Kenneth J. Creber
and William J. Durrell Jr.
Outside of the fact that all of the names
I’ve said did incredible work, it’s how
these parts all fit together so perfectly
that makes this show what it is.
It is a lot more than the sum of its parts.
Ideas this outlandish can have trouble getting
everyone on a show on board the same train
of thought.
It all just works perfectly in concert.
Which is rare.
It’s one of my favorite shows ever made,
and a lot of it has to do with how engaging
and affecting these silly stories told in
silly ways still manage to land.
It’s got more heart than most, even in light
of a lot of wonky shit happening behind the
scenes.
It’s a great show to watch with a blanket
and some pie.
Like a pepperoni pie.
It’s a love story about two people who can
never touch.
The dialogue is an artform.
It’s too clever by a mile, got canceled
before its time, and still managed to be one
of the greatest and more artistically hungry
tv shows to ever exist.
You can watch the whole thing for free, right
now on CW Seed.
There’s a link in the doobly-do.
Go, fall in love with it.
And let me know what you think.